Shared spack: config-scope-based approach (#52468)
spack/spack: lib/spack/docs/where_spack_writes_data.rst

Layout detection
----------------

Spack picks one of two *layout schemes* at startup:

* **new**: data under ``~/.local/share/spack``, state under ``~/.local/state/spack``, cache under ``~/.cache/spack``.
* **old**: installs in ``$spack/opt/spack``, environments in ``$spack/var/spack/environments``, license files in ``$spack/etc/spack/licenses``, etc. — i.e. the pre-1.2 layout.

The scheme is chosen by ``etc/spack/defaults/include.yaml`` using a ``when:`` clause that calls :func:`spack.paths.detect_layout`.
The new layout is defined by ``etc/spack/defaults/base/config.yaml``, which sets paths like ``config:install_tree:root`` to ``$data_home/installs``, ``environments_root`` to ``$data_home/environments``, etc.
The ``old-layout`` scope (``etc/spack/defaults/old/config.yaml``) overrides both the homes and the individual paths (install_tree, environments, etc.) to point back into ``$spack``.

**Unilateral override**: Setting any of the new-style environment variables (``SPACK_DATA_HOME``, ``SPACK_STATE_HOME``, or ``SPACK_CACHE_HOME``) forces the new layout even when legacy ``$spack`` data is present.
This ensures a partial override never produces a split layout.

> **Config bypass**: If you set ``config::`` or ``include::`` entries directly (bypassing the defaults), the base config scope is omitted and the ``SPACK_*_HOME`` environment variables have no effect on locations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Config bypass**: If you set ``config::`` or ``include::`` entries directly (overriding the defaults with the ``::`` :ref:`configuration override syntax <config-overrides>`), the base config scope is omitted and the ``SPACK_*_HOME`` environment variables have no effect on locations.
```

| modules        | x         |                    |            |                    |
+----------------+-----------+--------------------+------------+--------------------+
| environments   | x         |                    |            |                    |
+----------------+-----------+--------------------+------------+--------------------+
| misc cache     |           | x [#wheretable-2]_ |            |                    |
+----------------+-----------+--------------------+------------+--------------------+
| test stages    |           | x                  |            |                    |
+----------------+-----------+--------------------+------------+--------------------+
| licenses       | x         |                    |            |                    |
+----------------+-----------+--------------------+------------+--------------------+
| config files   |           |                    |            | x [#wheretable-3]_ |
+----------------+-----------+--------------------+------------+--------------------+

.. [#wheretable-1] ``cache_home`` is used as a backup, but Spack prefers to write into the user's temp dir if it's available.

> .. [#wheretable-2] ``cache_home`` is modeled after ``$XDG_CACHE_HOME``.

Reviewer: I still think this is more confusing than valuable, and we should put the misc_cache in cache_home

**Unilateral override**: Setting any of the new-style environment variables (``SPACK_DATA_HOME``, ``SPACK_STATE_HOME``, or ``SPACK_CACHE_HOME``) forces the new layout even when legacy ``$spack`` data is present.
This ensures a partial override never produces a split layout.

**Config bypass**: If you set ``config::`` or ``include::`` entries directly (overriding the defaults with the ``::`` :ref:`configuration override syntax <config-overrides>`), the base config scope is omitted and the ``SPACK_*_HOME`` environment variables have no effect on locations.

How to override
---------------

In order of priority (highest first):

1. **Specific config keys** for individual paths — set ``config:install_tree:root``, ``config:environments_root``, ``config:license_dir``, ``config:source_cache``, ``config:gpg_path``, or ``config:gpg_keys_path`` in any user/site/system scope.

2. **Env vars** for individual homes — ``SPACK_DATA_HOME``, ``SPACK_STATE_HOME``, or ``SPACK_CACHE_HOME``.
   Any of these also *forces the new scheme* even when legacy ``$spack`` data is present, so a partial override never produces a split layout.

> 3. **Layout roots** — set ``config:locations:{data,state,cache}`` to redirect everything that uses the corresponding substitution.

Reviewer 2: I think it's fine to use bullet points etc, but the style looks very much AI-generated (bullet points, bold term, em-dash). Can you match style with the rest of the docs?

Also we don't use literal em-dashes, but `--`. I would reduce the em-dash use here, it's a bit off-putting if it looks entirely machine generated.

> Config locations themselves — ``user_config_path``, ``system_config_path``, the entry-point ``include.yaml`` — are NOT in config (they bootstrap config).

Reviewer 2: This is also hallmark Claude, right? I find it hard to read without being reminded of that fact. Better to use your own style when communicating to users.
